Focus on FINANCE

GLOSSARY

Depression: A severe and long-lasting eco-
nomic downturn that is worse and deeper
than a recession; a severe reduction in
gross domestic product (GDP).

Employee: A person who works for an
employer in exchange for a monetary
payment.

Employer: A person or business providing a
job or work to others and giving a mone-
tary payment in exchange for the work.

Extended unemployment benefits:
Additional weeks of benefits available to
workers who have exhausted regular
unemployment insurance benefits during
periods of high unemployment.

Labor force: The total number of workers,
including both the employed and the
unemployed.

Recession: A period of declining real income
and rising unemployment; significant
decline in general economic activity
extending over a period of time.

Taxes: Fees charged on business and indi-
vidual income, activities, property, or
products by governments. People are
required to pay taxes.

Unemployed: People 16 years of age and
older who are without jobs and actively
seeking work.

Unemployment compensation: A program
providing cash benefits for a specified
period of time to workers who lose a job
through no fault of their own. Also known
as unemployment insurance.

Unemployment rate: The percentage of
the labor force that is willing and able to
work, does not currently have a job, and
is actively looking for employment.

December 2020

Unemployment Insurance:
A Tried and True Safety Net

Jeannette N. Bennett, Senior Economic Education Specialist

“Of all the aspects of social misery nothing is so heartbreaking as unemployment.”
—Jane Addams

What happens when workers lose their jobs through no fault of their own?
How do they manage with the loss of income? Today, every state has an
unemployment insurance (UI) program that provides some income to
these unemployed workers. But how did Ul begin and how does it work?

The prosperous times of the 1920s set an expectation of having employ-
ment and money to spend. Electricity, radios, refrigerators, and even cars
became more affordable. And with employment opportunities, people
grew accustomed to the good times of the “Roaring Twenties” and thought
they would last forever.

But beginning in 1929, things changed. The Great Depression brought an
economic catastrophe with a challenging crisis. Between 1929 and 1933,
the unemployment rate soared to 25 percent of the labor force (Figure 1).
The effects were alarming and in stark contrast to the 1920s. Without a
safety net, a lost job meant no income. Many became homeless with no
means to support their families. And the struggles began.

Figure 1
Civilian Unemployment Rate, 1919-2006

Percent

30
25% in 1933

25

20

0
1919 1929 1939 1949 1959 1969 1979 1989 1999

SOURCE: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis;
https://www.stlouisfed.org/education/great-depression-curriculum-unit.

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis | research.stlouisfed.org
