PAGE ONE Economics®

Federal-State Partnership

Struggles and crises can bring innovative ideas and
reform. And that’s exactly what happened during the
Great Depression. The ugly picture of severe depression
with despair and poverty brought a renewed interest
in and attention to providing unemployment
compensation (UC).

Programs were tried at the state level. Wisconsin led the
way and in 1932 became the first state to enact a UI law.
A few other states followed with similar programs, which
were funded by a tax on employers.' But most states
did not. They feared a loss of business and jobs to states
that did not tax employers. This created an interstate
problem and was, therefore, a direct concern of the
federal government.

In 1935, as part of the Social Security Act, the Federal
Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) created the federal-state
unemployment insurance program.? This act mirrored
the earlier state plans, with the purpose of temporarily
replacing a portion of wages for workers who had been
laid off and who were looking and available for work.

The act gave oversight responsibility to the U.S. Depart-
ment of Labor (DOL). Within federal guidelines, states
were given the freedom and flexibility to set criteria and
design their programs. State unemployment offices were
created to implement their UI programs and make pay-
ments to workers who qualified.

Today, all states have UI programs, but they vary in
design. For example, eligibility requirements for receiving
benefits vary based on duration of prior employment and
whether full-time or part-time status. Also, the normal
maximum amount of benefits, the duration of benefits,
and claim procedures often differ. And Ul program guide-
lines within each state are periodically subject to change
according to economic conditions; this can be done by
state governments or by the federal government in times
of recession or special conditions. (See boxed insert,
“Sample of Normal State Unemployment Benefits, August
2020.")3.4

Eligibility for Unemployment Insurance

All states require that workers be able to work, available
for work, and actively seeking work for UI eligibility. Most
states require a work history listing a minimum time

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis | research.stlouisfed.org 2

Sample of Normal State Unemployment Benefits, August 2020

State Normal maximum Normal maximum
weeks of benefits weekly benefits
Arkansas 26 $451
California 26 $450
Florida 12 $275
Georgia 14 $365
Indiana 26 $390
Kentucky 26 $552
Louisiana 26 $247
Massachusetts 30 $823
Mississippi 26 $235
Missouri 20 $320
Nevada 26 $469
North Dakota 26 $640
Oklahoma 26 $539
Tennessee 26 $275
Texas 26 $521
Washington 26 $844

worked and a minimum amount of earnings based on a
12-month period.>

Workers must file claims weekly to maintain eligibility.
Any earnings for the period, including job offers accepted
or declined, must be reported. This can affect eligibility
for receiving benefits and the amount received. Addition-
ally, workers must continue to meet state requirements.®

In all states, workers can be denied benefits. Knowingly
making false statements to obtain benefit payments is
one reason for a denial. Other reasons include voluntarily
leaving work without good cause and being discharged
for misconduct connected with work. And even after
being determined eligible for Ul, workers can become
ineligible if they’re unable to or unavailable for work, not
actively seeking work, or refusing an offer of suitable
work.” UI does not cover people who leave their jobs
voluntarily or people looking for their first job. Individuals
who are self-employed are normally not entitled to reg-
ular UC. Also, certain types of employment, such as
charitable work, are excluded from UI coverage.®

Benefits

Each state has its own formula for determining unemploy-
ment benefits. And the number of unemployed workers

