PAGE ONE Economics®

Figure 2

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis | research.stlouisfed.org 3

Percent of Labor Force Getting Unemployment Benefits, August 27, 2020

Percent of labor force
getting benefits

My = 15%
[9 11-14%
[-] 6-10%
[_] <5%

SOURCE: Stateline analysis of U.S. Department of Labor and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

receiving UC changes according to economic conditions
(Figure 2).9 Generally, benefits are calculated as a per-
centage of a worker’s income over the past year, up to a
certain maximum. And some states pay reduced benefits
for part-time work, which provides only a small amount
of income. Since payments are capped, UI may replace
a smaller share of previous earnings for higher-income
workers than for lower-income workers. The earnings
and work history requirements can especially affect low-
wage workers. They may not qualify for unemployment
benefits, because many may not have had previous steady
employment. States’ eligibility rules may require a certain
amount of steady earnings from a worker over the pre-
vious year.!°

Today, in most states the regular program provides up
to 26 weeks of benefits to workers who qualify. However,
this does not mean all workers receive the benefits for
the entire time—only for the time they qualify.

Benefits can be received on a state-issued, prepaid debit
card. Or UC can be directly deposited into a personal bank
or credit union account, or onto an existing prepaid card.
Some states will send payments by paper check.!1 UC
payments are taxable income and must be reported on
federal income tax returns.'2 Also, in states that have a
state income tax, UC may be subject to this tax.

Extended Benefits

UI programs often change. In times of recession or special
economic conditions, workers may receive extended
unemployment benefits. For example, a state may pay
UC for a longer period of time when the state’s unemploy-
ment rate increases. Also, Congress can approve addi-
tional payment amounts, extend the amount of time
people can receive benefits, and expand eligibility to
include part-time workers during times of high unemploy-
ment.!3 For example, in response to the COVID-19 pan-
demic, Federal Pandemic Unemployment Compensation
(FPUC) was enacted in March 2020. The DOL gave instruc-
tions to administer an additional $600 weekly payment
to individuals who were collecting regular UC. The addi-
tional FPUC benefit payments were fully federally funded.
The temporary boost to regular UC was scheduled to
end after a person’s last week of unemployment before
July 31, 2020.14

Who Pays for Unemployment Insurance?

The regular UI program is generally funded by employers.
Most employers pay both federal and state unemploy-
ment taxes.’ The unemployment taxes are based on the
amount of wages paid to employees and are determined
as a percentage of an employee's wages. The FUTA tax
